>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, MARCH 20:
PRESIDENT OBAMA EMBARKS ON A
HISTORIC TRIP TO CUBA.
DAY ONE OF A PLAN TO START
SENDING SOME MIGRANTS ARRIVING
IN GREECE BACK TO TURKEY.
AND THE MAN BEHIND THE LYRICS
OF "FIDDLER ON THE ROOF."
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WHEELS DOWN IN HAVANA FOR AIR
FORCE ONE, AS BARACK OBAMA
BECOMES THE FIRST SITTING U.S.
PRESIDENT TO VISIT CUBA SINCE
CALVIN COOLIDGE ALMOST 90 YEARS
AGO.
IT WAS RAINING AS THE FIRST
FAMILY GOT OFF THE PLANE TO BE
GREETED BY CUBA'S FOREIGN
MINISTER.
WHILE STILL ON THE PLANE,
PRESIDENT OBAMA TWEETED, "QUE
BOLAÁ, CUBA?" OR "WHAT'S UP,
CUBA" IN SPANISH.
THE PRESIDENT WILL SPEND A BUSY
TWO DAYS ON THE COMMUNIST-RULED
ISLAND NATION, WHICH HAS BEEN
PREPARING FOR HIS VISIT.
ONLY EIGHT MONTHS AFTER THE
FLAG WAS RAISED AT THE REOPENED
U.S. EMBASSY IN CUBA, FOR THE
FIRST TIME IN MORE THAN HALF A
CENTURY, THE STREETS OF HAVANA
ARE DECORATED WITH AMERICAN
FLAGS AND IMAGES OF PRESIDENT
OBAMA.
THE PRESIDENT AND THE
FIRST FAMILY ARE BEGINNING THEIR
CUBAN VISIT WITH A WALKING TOUR
OF HISTORIC OLD HAVANA TONIGHT.
MR. OBAMA WILL MEET TOMORROW
WITH CUBAN PRESIDENT RAUL CASTRO
AND ATTEND A STATE DINNER.
OBAMA HAS NO PLANS TO MEET WITH
FORMER PRESIDENT AND
REVOLUTIONARY LEADER FIDEL
CASTRO, OLDER BROTHER OF THE
CURRENT PRESIDENT.
BUT HE DOES INTEND TO SPEND TIME
ON TUESDAY WITH CRITICS OF
CASTRO'S GOVERNMENT, MANY OF
WHOM HAVE FACED ARRESTS FOR
THEIR OUTSPOKEN OPPOSITION.
THE WHITE HOUSE WOULD NOT
DISCLOSE WHICH DISSIDENTS MR.
OBAMA WILL SEE BUT INSISTS THE
LIST IS NOT NEGOTIABLE.
>> BUT I CAN TELL YOU THAT THE
PRESIDENT IS GOING TO MOVE
FORWARD AND HOST MEETINGS AND
HAVE A CONVERSATION ABOUT HUMAN
RIGHTS WITH THE PEOPLE THAT HE
CHOOSES TO MEET WITH.
>> Stewart: THIS AFTERNOON IN
HAVANA, POLICE ARRESTED DOZENS
OF ANTI-GOVERNMENT DISSIDENTS
FROM THE SO-CALLED "LADIES IN
WHITE" GROUP.
THE PRESIDENT WILL ALSO DELIVER
A SPEECH AT THE NATIONAL THEATER
OF CUBA, WHERE HE PLANS TO LAY
OUT HIS VISION FOR HOW THE TWO
COUNTRIES CAN WORK TOGETHER.
HE'LL ALSO CATCH A BASEBALL GAME
BETWEEN CUBA'S NATIONAL TEAM AND
THE MAJOR LEAGUE TAMPA BAY RAYS.
>> Reporter: AND IN A VIDEO
RELEASED ONLINE BY THE WHITE
HOUSE YESTERDAY, THE PRESIDENT
JOKED WITH CUBA'S MOST FAMOUS
COMEDIAN, LUIS SILVA WHO OFTEN
SATIRIZES THE FAILINGS OF THE
CUBAN GOVERNMENT AND ECONOMIC
SYSTEM.
EARLIER I SPOKE WITH CHRISTOPHER
SABATINI, A PROFESSOR AT
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY'S SCHOOL OF
INTERNATIONAL AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS
ABOUT THIS NEW ERA IN U.S.-CUBA
RELATIONS.
CHRISTOPHER, THIS HAS DESCRIBED
AS A LARGELY SYMBOLIC TRIP BUT
YOU DON'T GO TO ALL OF THIS
TROUBLE JUST FOR SYMBOLISM,
WHAT ELSE ASK THERE TO IT?
>> IN BOTH CASE AS LEGACY.
RAUL CASTRO AND HIS OLDER
BROTHER FIDEL HAVE RULED CUBA
SINCE 1959, FIDEL WILL TURN 90
IN AUGUST, SO IF YOU WANT TO SEE
SOME ELEMENTS OF THE REVOLUTION
PRESERVED AND IT HAS NOT BEEN
SUCCESSFUL ON THE ECONOMIC 0
FRONT, ON THE SOCIAL FRONT.
ON OBAMA SIDE HE WANTS TO TURN
THE PAGE AND DOESN'T WANT TO
HAVE CUBA AND U.S. RELATIONS IN
CUBA FROZEN IN THE COLD WAR, HE
HAS ENGAGED IN REFORMS THROUGH
EXECUTIVE ORDERS, HE WANTS TO
PRESERVE THAT LEGACY AS WELL, SO
SYMBOLIC BUT VERY IMPORTANT.
>> Stewart: HIS CRITICS HAVE
SAID SOME OF HIS APPROACH TO
CUBA FOREIGN POLICY THAT IS
NAIVE AND DANGEROUS.
>> DANGER DEFINITELY NOT, CUBA
IS NOT A NATIONAL SECURITY
THREAT TO THE UNITED STATES
DESPITE SOME CLAIMS, BUT HE HAS
-- HE IS TRYING TO ENGAGE WITH
CUBA AND A GOVERNMENT THAT
REALLY DOES NOT ABIDE BY BASIC
HUMAN RIGHTS STANDARDS SO A LOT
OF THE CRITICS ARE ARGUING OF
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S FOREIGN POLICY
HE IS WEAK NEED BEFORE DESPOTS
BUT OBAMA IS BETTING THAT A, IN
THE CASE OF CUBA 90 MILES OFF
THE COAST OF THE UNITED STATES
WHICH THERE ARE 2 MILLION CUBAN
AMERICANS TWO, THIRDS OF THEM IN
FLORIDA ALONE, THE FLOW OF
DIALOGUE AND EXCHANGE IS GOING
TO BUILD SORT OF, IF YOU WILL,
THE FOUNDATION FOR LONGER TERM
POLITICAL CHANGE THAT, YOU KNOW,
IS MORE IMPORTANT TAN WHETHER
YOU ENGAGE IN A GRUDGE MATCH
WITH THE CURRENT REGIME OR NOT.
>> WILL THE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES TALK ABOUT HUMAN
RIGHTS?
>> FIRST OF ALL IT IS IMPORTANT
THAT HUMAN RIGHTS HAVE NOT
CHANGED IN CUBA, A LITTLE OVER A
YEAR AGO THE PRESIDENT ANNOUNCED
A SERIES OF EXECUTIVE ACTIONS TO
LOOSEN THE EMBARGO AND CUBA HAS
NOT BUDGED, NORMALIZED, WE NOW
HAVE EMBASSIES IN EACH OTHER
COUNTRIES, CUBA HAS NOT BUDGED
ON HUMAN RIGHTS.
>> IN THE LAST MONTH ALONE, OVER
1,400 DISSIDENTS AND ACTIVISTS
WERE ROUNDED UP AND BRIEFLY
DETAINED.
>> WHAT WILL HAPPEN?
HE IS GOING TO TALK TO THE
DISSIDENTS AND HAVE A MEETING IN
THE EMBASSY WITH HUMAN RIGHTS
ACTIVIST AND ENTREPRENEURS AS
WELL.
I THINK MOST IMPORTANTLY WHAT HE
WILL DO IS ENGAGE IN A PUBLIC
SPEECH THAT WILL BE BROADCAST
LIVE NATIONALLY, IN THE NATIONAL
THEATRE, AND YOU WILL SEE HIM
TALK ABOUT CUBANS ASPIRATION
FORCE A DIFFERENT LIFE AND CLOSE
RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES
AND HUMAN RIGHTS AND POLITICAL
FREEDOM BEING A PART OF THAT.
>> Stewart: CHRISTOPHER
SABBATINI, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>>
>> Stewart: A NEW MIGRANT DEAL
BETWEEN TURKEY AND THE EUROPEAN
UNION AIMED AT STOPPING ILLEGAL
IMMIGRATION WENT INTO EFFECT
TODAY.
UNDER THE AGREEMENT, MIGRANTS
ILLEGALLY ENTERING GREECE BY SEA
WILL BE SENT TO TURKEY AFTER
THEIR ASYLUM CLAIMS ARE
PROCESSED.
BUT GREECE SAYS REFUGEES ARE
STILL CONTINUING TO ENTER, WITH
AT LEAST 875 PEOPLE ARRIVING IN
THE PAST 24 HOURS.
THE E.U. WILL HELP GREECE
IMPLEMENT THE DEAL BY SENDING
FOUR THOUSAND OFFICIALS TO HELP
MANAGE THE MIGRANTS' CASES.
THE DEAL CALLS FOR GREECE TO
HAVE A FAST-TRACK PROCESS IN
PLACE TO ASSESS ASYLUM CLAIMS BY
APRIL 4.
TODAY AT THE VATICAN, IN HIS
PALM SUNDAY MESSAGE, POPE
FRANCIS LAMENTED WHAT HE CALLED
WIDESPREAD "INDIFFERENCE" TO THE
PLIGHT OF THE REFUGEES.
JOINING ME NOW FROM THE GREEK
ISLAND OF LESBOS, AN ENTRY POINT
FOR MANY OF THE REFUGEES IS
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MALCOLM BRABANT.
>> Stewart: HOW ARE THINGS
GOING SO FAR?
>> THINGS ARE SLOWING UP IN
CERTAIN PARTS FORCE ISLAND, BUT
IT LOOKS AS THOUGH PEOPLE ARE
STILL DETERMINED TO COME HERE.
MOST EXTRAORDINARY, ACTUALLY
TODAY, WE ARE ABOUT 500
PAKISTANIS, FOR EXAMPLE, WHO
REGISTERED IN A CAMP JUST
OUTSIDE OF THE MAIN TOWN.
NOW, THESE ARE THE SORT OF
PEOPLE, THIS IS THE SORT OF
NATIONALITY UNFORTUNATELY THAT
THE EUROPEAN, EUROPEAN UNION NO
LONGER WANTS AND ARE MOST LIKELY
TO BE DEPORT SOD THEY HAVE COME
AN EXTREMELY LONG WAY AND ALL
EXTREMELY WORRIED.
>> I TALKED TO ONE A PAKISTANI
MAN WHO HAS BEEN HERE A LITTLE
LONGER THAN THEM, ONE DAY, AND
HE SAID THAT SHE A CHRISTIAN,
AND IF GREECE SENDS HIM BACK, HE
SAYS HE WILL COMMIT SUICIDE HERE
BECAUSE THE PROSPECT OF GOING
BACK TO PAKISTAN IS TOO AWFUL TO
CONSIDER.
>> Stewart: TELL ME ABOUT THE
ADMINISTRATIVE CHALLENGES THE
FIRST DAY.
>> WELL THEY HAVE BEEN DOING
OVER THE PAST DAY OR SO IS TO
EMPTY THE ISLAND OF PEOPLE THAT
ARE HERE ALREADY, AND WE HAVE
SEEN SEVERAL FERRIS COMING INTO
LESBOS TO TAKE PEOPLE AWAY TO
VARIOUS PARTS OF GREECE, TO AN
AWFUL PORT JUST OUTSIDE OF
ATHENS AND ANOTHER PLACE IS
KABBALAH, AND THIS IS WHEREAS
ASYLUM CLAIMS WILL BE ASSESSED.
I THINK WHAT IS HAPPENING HERE
IS THAT WHAT THEY WANT TO BE
ABLE TO DO IS TO GET THEM AWAY
FROM -- INTO VARIOUS PLACES
AROUND GREECE SO THEY CAN
DISPERSE THEM BECAUSE THEY ARE
CONCERNED THAT THERE IS GOING TO
BE SOME REVOLT AMONGST THESE
PEOPLE BECAUSE THEY WON'T WANT
TO GO BACK AND WE CAN SEE THE
PREPARATIONS OF THE AUTHORITIES
ARE MAKING.
THEY HAVE BROUGHT IN RIOT POLICE
FOR EXAMPLE TO CAMPS TO MAKE
SURE THAT PEOPLE DO REGISTER,
AND, RELUCTANTLY BECAUSE THEY
END UP GETTING SENT BACK.
>> Stewart: WHAT ABOUT THE
GREEK PEOPLE, THE GREEK FOLKS ON
THE GROUND, HOW ARE THEY FEELING
TODAY?
>> WELL, I WENT TO THE, THE MAIN
CHURCH THIS MORNING TO SEE WHAT
THE REACTION WAS AND WE TALKED
TO THE PRIEST INSIDE THE CHURCH
AND HE SAID, WELL, I REGARD
THESE PEOPLE AS LIKE FISH YOU
GOT OUT OF THE WATER THEY ARE
HALF DEAD SO TO SEND THEM BACK
IS ABSOLUTELY CRUEL BUT OF
COURSE, THERE IS A DESIRE THAT
THIS WHOLE WAVE OF PEOPLE COMING
HERE WILL COME TO AN END BECAUSE
THIS IS AN ISLAND THAT IS
DEPENDENT ON THE HOLIDAY TRADE
AND THEY ARE GOING TO HAVE A
TERRIBLE 2016, ALL OF THEIR
CHARTER FLIGHTS HAVE COME TO AN
END, HARDLY ANY SORT OF PLANNED
HOLIDAY MAKERS ARE COMING HERE
AND THEY ARE LOOKING AT THE
ECONOMIC RUIN POSSIBLY THIS
YEAR, SO THEY ARE DESPERATE FOR
THIS MIGRANT THING TO COME TO AN
END.
>> Stewart: MALCOLM BRABANT TO
REPORTING FROM LESBOS, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>>
>> Stewart: SENATE MAJORITY
LEADER MITCH McCONNELL TODAY
FLATLY RULED OUT A VOTE ON
SUPREME COURT NOMINEE MERRICK
GARLAND IN THE LAME-DUCK SESSION
OF CONGRESS FOLLOWING THE
NOVEMBER ELECTION, EVEN IF
DEMOCRATS WIN THE PRESIDENCY AND
THE SENATE.
>> WE THINK THE IMPORTANT
PRINCIPLE IN THE MIDDLE OF THIS
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, WHICH IS
RAGING, IS THAT AMERICAN PEOPLE
NEED TO WEIGH IN AND DECIDE
WHO'S GOING TO MAKE THIS
DECISION.
NOT THIS LAME DUCK PRESIDENT.
>> Stewart: FOR HIS PART, SENATE
MINORITY LEADER HARRY REID SAID
ON NBC'S "MEET THE PRESS" THAT
THE MAJORITY LEADER'S REFUSAL TO
ALLOW A VOTE WOULD HAVE
CONSEQUENCES.
>> I DON'T KNOW WHY McCONNELL'S
DONE THIS TO HIS SENATORS.
LEADING HIS SENATE OVER THE
CLIFF AND I DON'T THINK THEY'RE
GOING TO GO.
>> Stewart: READ MORE ABOUT THE
POLITICAL SHOWDOWN OVER THE
OPENING ON THE SUPREME COURT.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Stewart: SINCE OPENING ON
BROADWAY IN 1964, "FIDDLER ON
THE ROOF" HAS BECOME A CLASSIC.
A MUSICAL ABOUT HOLDING ONTO
TRADITIONS IN A CHANGING WORLD,
A STRUGGLE AGAINST OPPRESSION,
AND FINDING JOY AND LOVE IN THE
FACE OF HARDSHIP.
A REVIVAL OF "FIDDLER" IS NOW
PLAYING ON BROADWAY, AND THE
SHOW'S ORIGINAL LYRICIST,
91-YEAR-OLD SHELDON HARNICK,
HAS HAD A FRONT ROW SEAT.
THE NEWSHOUR'S ZACHARY GREEN HAS
THIS PROFILE.
>> ♪ TRADITIOOOOON!
TRADITION!
>> Reporter: A HALF CENTURY
AFTER ITS PREMIERE, THE SONGS OF
"FIDDLER ON THE ROOF" ARE KNOWN
AROUND THE WORLD.
IT TELLS THE STORY OF TEVYE, A
POOR JEWISH DAIRYMAN, AND HIS
FAMILY FACING OPPRESSION IN
RURAL RUSSIA AT THE TURN OF THE
20TH CENTURY.
THIS PRODUCTION AT THE BROADWAY
THEATER MARKS THE FIFTH TIME
"FIDDLER" HAS BEEN REVIVED ON
BROADWAY.
>> THIS IS ONE OF THE FINEST
CASTS WE'VE EVER HAD.
SO REVISITING THE SHOW HAS BEEN
A THRILL.
>> Reporter: EVEN AT 91-YEARS-
OLD, LYRICIST SHELDON HARNICK
HAS BEEN DIRECTLY INVOLVED IN
THIS REVIVAL.
HELPING CHOOSE THE DIRECTOR AND
ATTENDING REHEARSALS.
WE SPOKE WITH HIM AT SARDI'S
RESTAURANT, FAMOUS FOR ITS
CARICATURES OF BROADWAY STARS;
AMONGST THEM, HARNICK'S OWN
LIKENESS.
HARNICK SAYS THE INSPIRATION FOR
"FIDDLER" CAME WHEN HE RECEIVED
A BOOK BY HUMORIST SHOLEM
ALEICHEM.
>> THE STORIES WERE RIVETING.
AND WHAT WAS ASTONISHING ABOUT
THEM WAS THAT SOME OF THEM WERE
ACTUALLY TRAGIC, AND YET THERE
WAS A GREAT DEAL OF HUMOR IN
THEM.
AND BY THE TIME YOU GOT TO THE
END OF THE STORY, YOU MIGHT BE
CRYING, BUT YOU WERE LAUGHING
ALONG THE WAY.
SO I SENT IT TO JERRY BOCK, AND
I SAID, "THIS IS OUR NEXT
MUSICAL."
>> Reporter: COMPOSER JERRY BOCK
AND HARNICK HAD ALREADY WRITTEN
HIT MUSICALS LIKE "SHE LOVES
ME," ALSO A CURRENT BROADWAY
REVIVAL, AND "FIORELLO," ABOUT
NEW YORK CITY MAYOR LAGUARDIA.
BUT "FIDDLER" WOULD BECOME THEIR
MOST SUCCESSFUL COLLABORATION
AND PRODUCED THEIR BEST KNOWN
SONG, BASED ON ALEICHEM'S PROSE.
>> ♪ IF I WERE A RICH MAN.
ALL DAY LONG I'D BITTY BITTY
♪ BUM, IF I WERE A WEALTHY MAN!
>> I FIND IT A LITTLE
EMBARRASSING IF SOMEBODY READS
ONE OF THE STORIES CLOSELY, HE
WILL FIND THE LYRICS TO IF I
WERE A RICH MAN.
I PRACTICALLY JUST TOOK THEM
RIGHT OUT OF THE STORY AND SET
THEM TO MUSIC.
THAT'S NOT ENTIRELY TRUE; I HAVE
SOME CRAFT.
BUT A LOT OF THOSE IMAGES WERE
IN THE STORIES.
>> Reporter: "FIDDLER'S" MAIN
STORY FOLLOWS THE STRUGGLES OF
TEVYE AND HIS WIFE, GOLDE, AS
THEY TRY TO MARRY OFF THEIR FIVE
DAUGHTERS.
>> ♪ MATCHMAKER, MATCHMAKER MAKE
ME NO MATCH.
♪ I'M IN NO RUSH.
MAYBE I'VE LEARNED.
>> Reporter: THE THREE ELDEST
INSIST ON MARRYING SOMEONE THEY
LOVE, DESPITE THE WISHES OF
THEIR WELL-MEANING PARENTS TO
FIND THEM WEALTHY SUITORS.
THAT DISASSOCIATION BETWEEN LOVE
AND MARRIAGE IS ILLUSTRATED IN
THE SONG "DO YOU LOVE ME," WHERE
TEVYE AND GOLDE ADMIT THEIR
FEELINGS FOR EACH OTHER AFTER 25
YEARS OF MARRIAGE.
♪
HARNICK WROTE IT AS A LATE
ADDITION TO THE MUSICAL DURING
ITS INITIAL PRE-BROADWAY RUN IN
DETROIT.
>> I WAS STANDING IN THE BACK OF
THE HOUSE.
AND I SUDDENLY STARTED TO SOB.
AND I THOUGHT, 'WHY AM I WEEPING
LIKE THIS?'
AND THEN I THOUGHT, 'IT'S
BECAUSE I WISHED THAT MY OWN
PARENTS HAD HAD THE RELATIONSHIP
THAT GOLDE AND TEVYE HAD HAD.'
I GREW UP DURING THE DEPRESSION,
AND THERE WERE A LOT OF VICIOUS,
VIOLENT ARGUMENTS BETWEEN MY
PARENTS ABOUT MONEY.
NOT THAT THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN TEVYE AND GOLDE IS A
SIMPLE, LOVING RELATIONSHIP,
IT'S A COMPLEX RELATIONSHIP, BUT
BASICALLY IT'S A LOVING
RELATIONSHIP.
AND IT JUST AFFECTED ME, AND I
STARTED TO CRY.
SO THERE WAS MUCH MORE IN THE
SONG THAN I KNEW WHEN I WROTE
IT.
>> Reporter: "FIDDLER" OPENED ON
BROADWAY TO RAVE REVIEWS AND
WENT ON TO SWEEP THE 1965 TONY
AWARDS.
THE ORIGINAL PRODUCTION RAN FOR
EIGHT YEARS.
AT THE TIME, THE LONGEST RUN IN
BROADWAY HISTORY.
THE 1971 MOVIE VERSION BROUGHT
THE SHOW TO A WIDER AUDIENCE.
ALTHOUGH THE STORY FOCUSES ON
THE PLIGHT OF RUSSIAN JEWS,
HARNICK SAYS THE PREJUDICE IN
THE FILM AND STAGE PRODUCTIONS
IS FAMILIAR TO MANY DIFFERENT
PEOPLE.
>> WE SAW A REMARKABLE
PRODUCTION OF IT IN A BLACK AND
PUERTO RICAN NEIGHBORHOOD, WHERE
THE CAST WAS ALL BLACK AND
PUERTO RICAN.
AND THE YOUNG BLACK MAN, HE WAS
15-YEARS-OLD, WHO PLAYED TEVYE,
WAS SUPERB.
THEY UNDERSTOOD THE SHOW.
THEY UNDERSTOOD WHAT IT WAS
ABOUT, AND THAT KIND OF RACE
HATRED.
>> Reporter: AND HARNICK SAYS
THE MUSICAL'S END.
WHEN TEVYE'S FAMILY AND FELLOW
VILLAGERS LEAVE WITH ONLY THE
BELONGINGS THEY CAN CARRY, CAN
STILL BE SEEN IN REAL LIFE EVEN
TODAY.
>> THE SYRIAN PROBLEM AND PEOPLE
LEAVING SYRIA AND HAVING NOWHERE
TO GO, IT RESONATES EVEN MORE.
IT SAYS SOMETHING TERRIBLE ABOUT
THE HUMAN RACE THAT IN 50 YEARS,
THAT IMAGE HAS ALWAYS BEEN
CURRENT.
THERE'S ALWAYS BEEN SOME PLACE
IN THE WORLD WHERE SOMETHING
HORRIBLE IS GOING ON.
>> ♪ TO US AND OUR GOOD FORTUNE!
BE HAPPY!
BE HEALTHY!
LONG LIFE!
>> Reporter: BUT DESPITE THE
TIMELESS QUALITY OF "FIDDLER ON
THE ROOF", HARNICK SAYS THE
MUSICAL'S ENDURING LEGACY IS
STILL REMARKABLE TO HIM.
>> THAT WE WOULD RUN EIGHT
YEARS, AND THAT THE SHOW WOULD
BECOME WHAT IT WAS, WAS A
SURPRISE TO US.
IT'S KIND OF STILL A SURPRISE.
I MUST SAY IT'S A VERY PLEASANT
SURPRISE.
WE RECOGNIZED WHEN WE READ THE
STORIES THAT THEY WERE NOT JUST
ABOUT A JEWISH FAMILY, THAT
THERE WAS SOMETHING UNIVERSAL
ABOUT THESE STORIES.
AND WE TRIED TO REALIZE THE
UNIVERSALITY OF WHAT WAS IN
THOSE STORIES, AND TO MAKE THIS
A SHOW THAT WOULD APPEAL TO
PEOPLE OF ALL FAITHS AND ALL
BELIEFS.
>> ♪ DRINK L'CHAIM!
TO LIFE!
>> Stewart: A RECENT
REUTERS/IPSOS POLL REVEALS THAT
ONLY 21% OF AMERICANS THINK THE
COUNTRY IS HEADING IN THE RIGHT
DIRECTION.
SO, WHAT HAPPENS IN A DEMOCRATIC
SOCIETY WHERE UNDERSTANDABLE
GRIEVANCES HAVE TURNED MANY
CITIZENS ANGRY?
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD LOOKS BACK AT A LONG-
AGO LATE WINTER, AND TWO NATIONS
THAT RESPONDED IN VERY DIFFERENT
WAYS.
>> PEOPLE ARE FED UP WITH WHAT I
CALL THE WASHINGTON CARTEL.
>> THE KIND OF BLUSTER AND
BIGOTRY AND BULLYING.
>> ARE YOU TIRED OF A HANDFUL OF
BILLIONAIRES RUNNING OUR
ECONOMY?
>> Reporter: NOW IS THE LATE
WINTER OF OUR DISCONTENT, AT
LEAST, THAT'S WHAT THE POLLS,
POLITICIANS, AND THE PUNDITS
TELL US.
>> YOU'RE LOSING YOUR JOBS,
YOU'RE LOSING YOUR INCOME,
YOU'RE LOSING YOUR FACTORIES
>> Reporter: WE ARE AN ANGRY
PEOPLE, BATTERED BY ECONOMIC
STAGNATION AND CULTURAL
DISLOCATION.
FROM ACROSS THE POLITICAL
SPECTRUM COME ARGUMENTS THAT
WE'VE BEEN PLAYED FOR SUCKERS;
THE SYSTEM IS RIGGED.
SO HOW DOES A FREE SOCIETY
RESPOND?
HOW DO LEGITIMATE GRIEVANCES
THAT STIR LEGITIMATE ANGER GET
RESOLVED, NOT EXPLOITED?
ONE ANSWER COMES FROM A LATE
WINTER MORE THAN 80 YEARS AGO.
ON MARCH 4, 1933, FRANKLIN
DELANO ROOSEVELT BECAME
PRESIDENT OF A NATION WHERE ONE
IN FOUR ADULTS WERE OUT OF WORK,
WHERE BANKS WERE FAILING BY THE
HUNDREDS, WHERE DEPRIVATION WAS
A STARK REALITY.
HIS REASSURING WORDS ABOUT FEAR
ARE FAMOUS, LESS SO, HIS
>> THE ONLY THING WE HAVE TO
FEAR IS FEAR ITSELF.
>> Reporter: LESS SO, HIS
INDICTMENT OF THOSE RESPONSIBLE:
>> RULERS OF THE EXCHANGE OF
MANKIND'S GOODS HAVE FAILED
THROUGH THEIR OWN STUBBORNNESS
AND THEIR OWN INCOMPETENCE, HAVE
ADMITTED THEIR FAILURE, AND HAVE
ABDICATED.
>> Reporter: BUT BY MONTH'S END,
F.D.R. HAD TURNED FROM
RECRIMINATIONS TO ACTION, USING
THE FIRST OF HIS "FIRESIDE
CHATS" TO EXPLAIN A MANDATORY
WEEK-LONG BANK HOLIDAY TO AVOID
A RUN ON THE BANKS.
AND HE WAS ALSO OFFERING A RAFT
OF PROPOSALS DURING HIS FIRST
HUNDRED DAYS, A NEW DEAL, TO
PUMP UP THE ECONOMY.
>> CONFIDENCE AND COURAGE ARE
THE ESSENTIALS OF SUCCESS IN
CARRYING OUT OUR PLAN.
>> Reporter: BUT ACROSS THE
ATLANTIC IN ANOTHER DEMOCRATIC
NATION AFFLICTED BY CRISIS,
SOMETHING VERY DIFFERENT WAS
HAPPENING.
A DAY AFTER F.D.R.'S
INAUGURATION, GERMANS WENT TO
THE POLLS BURDENED BY THEIR
GRIEVANCES, PUNISHING
REPARATIONS IMPOSED ON THEM
AFTER WORLD WAR I AND STAGGERING
INFLATION THAT RENDERED LIFE
SAVINGS WORTHLESS.
THEIR VOTES STRENGTHENED THE
HAND OF INTERIM CHANCELLOR ADOLF
HITLER, WHO ENDLESSLY TOLD HIS
COUNTRY OF THE GREAT BETRAYAL AT
THE HANDS OF BOLSHEVIKS AND
JEWS, WHO, HE SAID, HAD
COMMITTED A "CRIME UNPARALLELED
IN GERMAN HISTORY."
BY THE END OF MARCH, 1933, THE
GERMAN PARLIAMENT WOULD ADOPT
"THE ENABLING ACT," WHICH LET
GERMANY SLIDE INTO A ONE-PARTY
DICTATORSHIP DETERMINED TO
AVENGE THE HUMILIATIONS OF THE
GREAT WAR BY MILITARY CONQUEST.
ONE NATION PRESERVING ITS
TRADITIONS, THE OTHER DESCENDING
INTO TYRANNY; BUT IT'S NOT THE
WHOLE STORY.
FOR INSTANCE, THERE WERE
IMPORTANT AMERICAN VOICES BACK
THEN ARGUING THE TOOLS OF THE
AMERICAN GOVERNMENT WERE
INADEQUATE TO MEET THE CRISIS OF
THE GREAT DEPRESSION.
WALTER LIPPMAN, THE MOST
INFLUENTIAL, SYNDICATED
NEWSPAPER COLUMNIST OF HIS DAY,
HAD ARGUED: "A MILD SPECIES OF
DICTATORSHIP WILL HELP US OVER
THE ROUGHEST SPOTS IN THE ROAD
AHEAD."
THE DAY AFTER F.D.R. WAS
INAUGURATED, A CHICAGO SUNDAY
TRIBUNE HEADLINE HAD READ: "FOR
DICTATORSHIP IF NECESSARY."
WILLIAM RANDOLPH HEARST, THEN
THE MOST POWERFUL NEWSPAPER
PUBLISHER OF HIS DAY, FINANCED A
MOVIE, "GABRIEL OVER THE WHITE
HOUSE."
>> MR. PRESIDENT, THIS IS
DICTATORSHIP.
>> Reporter: IT CELEBRATED THE
IDEA OF A DIVINELY INSPIRED
PRESIDENT SOLVING THE NATION'S
WOES BY SEIZING TOTAL POWER.
>> AND AS COMMANDER AND CHIEF OF
THE ARMY AND NAVY IT IS WITHIN
THE RIGHTS OF THE PRESIDENT TO
DECLARE THE COUNTRY UNDER
MARSHALL LAW.
>> Reporter: AND IN REAL LIFE,
LOUISIANA SENATOR HUEY LONG,
WHOSE CONTROL OVER THE STATE WAS
DESCRIBED AS A DICTATORSHIP BY
CRITICS-WAS PREPARING A
PRESIDENTIAL CHALLENGE TO F.D.R.
WITH A "SHARE THE WEALTH"
PROGRAM.
>> THAT FOUR PERCENT OF THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE OWN 85% OF THE
WEALTH OF AMERICA.
>> Reporter: RADIO PRIEST
CHARLES COUGHLIN, WHOSE
LISTENERS NUMBERED IN THE
MILLIONS, WAS BEGINNING HIS MOVE
FROM F.D.R. SUPPORTER TO
DENOUNCING "INTERNATIONAL
BANKERS" AND JEWISH POLITICAL
INFLUENCE.
>> WE BELIEVE IN CHRIST'S
PRINCIPAL OF LOVE YOUR NEIGHBOR
AS YOURSELF AND WITH THAT
PRINCIPAL I CHALLENGE EVERY JEW
IN THIS NATION TO TELL ME THAT
HE DOES NOT BELIEVE IN IT.
>> Reporter: AND IN 1937, F.D.R.
HIMSELF PUSHED THE BOUNDARIES OF
PRESIDENTIAL POWER, TRYING TO
CHANGE A SUPREME COURT THAT
OPPOSED MANY OF HIS PROGRAMS.
HE WANTED TO "PACK" THE HIGH
COURT WITH SIX ADDITIONAL
JUSTICES.
BUT HIS OWN DEMOCRATIC PARTY
REJECTED THE PLAN.
RETIREMENTS ENABLED F.D.R. TO
REPLACE ENOUGH JUSTICES SO THE
COURT'S WAS NO LONGER AN
OBSTACLE TO THE NEW DEAL.
>> I ASK THIS CONGRESS FOR
AUTHORITY AND FOR FUNDS
>> Reporter: BY 1940, A DEFENSE
MOBILIZATION TO MEET THE GROWING
NAZI THREAT FINALLY ENDED
WIDESPREAD UNEMPLOYMENT.
IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO KNOW WHAT
MIGHT HAVE HAPPENED WITH
DIFFERENT LEADERS AT THE HELM OF
THE UNITED STATES AND GERMANY;
IF THE U.S. HAD BEEN LED BY A
MORE TIMID, OR A MORE AGGRESSIVE
OR VENGEFUL LEADER.
AND EVEN IN THIS WINTER OF OUR
DISCONTENT, WE ARE FACING
NOTHING LIKE THE CRISIS OF THAT
GREAT DEPRESSION.
STILL, THAT LONG AGO MARCH HAS A
LESSON FOR US, WHEN A SENSE OF
GRIEVANCE IS STRONG ENOUGH, WIDE
ENOUGH, IT CAN SUBJECT EVEN THE
MOST STABLE OF POLITICAL SYSTEMS
TO THE MOST SIGNIFICANT OF
CHALLENGES.
>> Stewart: RETURNING TO CUBA,
AT A LATE AFTERNOON STOP IN THE
RAIN, PRESIDENT OBAMA VISITED
OLD HAVANA WITH HIS FAMILY.
EARLIER HE MET WITH U.S.
EMBASSY STAFF AND THEIR
FAMILIES.
AND CALLED HIS TRIP A HISTORIC
OPPORTUNITY TO ENGAGE WITH THE
CUBAN PEOPLE.
WE WILL HAVE MORE ON THE
NEWSHOUR TOMORROW AND AS ALWAYS
YOU CAN STAY UPDATE AT
PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR, THAT'S IT FOR
THIS EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND, GOOD NIGHT.